RELEASING.md (#2378)
valkey-io/valkey-glide: RELEASE.md

Reviewer: Rename to `RELEASING.md`

# Release Documentation

This document describes the process on how to release a new version of Valkey-GLIDE, how to use the GLIDE's CD workflows, and how to release a new wrapper.

## GLIDE - How to release a new version

**Contact a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer** on how to trigger the CD workflows and on how to login to the package manager accounts and how to access the relevant secrets.

## Deployment Guide

> 1. CHANGELOG: go through the CHANGELOG.md file found in the root folder and verify all required changes / bug fixes / features for this release are found in the file. Add a headline of the version and the release date to close all of its changes, for example for releasing version 0.3.0:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. CHANGELOG: Go through the CHANGELOG.md file found in the root folder and verify all required changes / bug fixes / features for this release are found in the file. Add a header with the version and the release date above the described changes. For example for releasing version 0.3.0:
```

    ### 0.3.0 (2024-03-25)
    #### Changes
    * Python: Allow routing Cluster requests by address. ([#1021](https://github.com/aws/glide-for-redis/pull/1021))
    * Python, Node: Added HSETNX command. ([#954](https://github.com/aws/glide-for-redis/pull/954), [#1091](https://github.com/aws/glide-for-redis/pull/1091))

    #### Features
    * Python: Allow chaining function calls on transaction. ([#987](https://github.com/aws/glide-for-redis/pull/987))

    ### 0.2.0 (2024-02-11)
    #### Changes
    * Python, Node: Added ZCARD command ([#871](https://github.com/aws/glide-for-redis/pull/871), [#885](https://github.com/aws/glide-for-redis/pull/885))

    b. Open a PR to the main branch with the missing changes and the new version header, and continue after it’s merged.

> 2. **If it’s a new minor/major version**, create a new branch named in the format `v$MAJOR_VERSION.$MINOR_VERSION` (e.g., v0.2), and checkout only the relevant code for this release (probably the latest commit in main, including the CHANGELOG latest commit). <br>

Author: do you mean that minor/major version is irrelevant?

> 2. **If it’s a new minor/major version**, create a new branch named in the format `v$MAJOR_VERSION.$MINOR_VERSION` (e.g., v0.2), and checkout only the relevant code for this release (probably the latest commit in main, including the CHANGELOG latest commit). <br>

Reviewer: Drop first part of the sentense

    MAJOR_VERSION = 0 <br>
    MINOR_VERSION = 3 <br>

>     git checkout -b `v$MAJOR_VERSION.$MINOR_VERSION` <br>

Reviewer 2: Probably should all be a code block. It looks strange as it is:
<img width="906" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0865d4ee-e70c-4ed7-93ce-a036ce64234b">

    a. Find how you saved the upstream remote repo (valkey-io/valkey-glide):
    ```
    [10:09:23] ubuntu (v1.x*)$ git remote -vv
    origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (fetch)
    origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (push)
    origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (fetch)
    origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (push)
   ```

   b. Push this branch to the upstream repo:

>    git push origin-aws

Reviewer 2: should also be in code block
```suggestion
   `git push origin-aws`
```

>     1. **If it’s only a patch version and the branch already exists**, checkout the existing branch (e.g. git checkout origin-aws/v0.2), and merge in the commit you’ve merge into main with the updates to the CHANGELOG.md file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. **If it’s only a patch version and the branch already exists**, checkout the existing branch (e.g. git checkout origin-aws/v0.2), and merge in the commit you’ve merged into main with the updates to the CHANGELOG.md file.
```

>     2. **Attributions file (ORT)**: Make sure the attributions file is updated by manually running the ORT workflow:

Author: i'm not too sure. I can ask Bar but it seems like she is away. I will ask the general channel.

        a. Go to: https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide/actions/workflows/ort.yml <br>

        b. On the right corner, click on “Run workflow” and set the branch to run against the ORT tool to your newly created branch name (e.g. v0.3), and the exact release version (e.g. 0.3.0) <br>

        c. <br>
        ![OSS Review Toolkit](images-release-md/oss-review-toolkit.png)

>         d. If diff is found the workflow will open a PR in the release branch with the required changes. Make sure that all dependencies are approved by a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer, refer to the SOP - Check the Licenses: ORT/Attributions File Setup and Usage Instructions. Merge the PR once it is ready.

Reviewer 2: What is an "SOP"?

Author: it is an internal doc. getting rid of its mention

>         d. If diff is found the workflow will open a PR in the release branch with the required changes. Make sure that all dependencies are approved by a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer, refer to the SOP - Check the Licenses: ORT/Attributions File Setup and Usage Instructions. Merge the PR once it is ready.

Author: SOP is one of the quip files mentioned in the original documents. i referenced it here in case they get contacted and will need to refer to this specific internal document to resolve issue

>         d. If diff is found the workflow will open a PR in the release branch with the required changes. Make sure that all dependencies are approved by a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer, refer to the SOP - Check the Licenses: ORT/Attributions File Setup and Usage Instructions. Merge the PR once it is ready.

Reviewer: we cannon refer non-open-source files here

        1. Trigger the CD workflow

>             a. The CD workflow will deploy the code into the package managers of the different wrappers. If there is any issue with the CD, **contact a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer**.

Reviewer: Mention that there are multiple CD jobs - one per client. You can add links to them.

>             a. The CD workflow will deploy the code into the package managers of the different wrappers. If there is any issue with the CD, **contact a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer**.

Reviewer 2: There's something really weird going on with the rendering here. It's getting two `a.` entries. Please restructure this so it looks a bit more sensible.
<img width="872" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3ca44a77-a95b-4dc6-b1c1-998d47afc3e5">

>             b. To trigger a new release we need to tag the new branch commit with the release version, if its a release candidate, which should

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            b. To trigger a new release we need to tag the new branch commit with the release version. If it's a release candidate, which should
```

>                    be release before a real release in order to test the version, add

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                   be released before a real release in order to test the version, add
```

>                    -rc$RC_VERSION:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                   `-rc$RC_VERSION:`
```

>             c. git tag v1.x.x-rc0

Reviewer: We don't create tags for RCs

>             c. git tag v1.x.x-rc0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            c. `git tag v1.x.x-rc0`
```

>             d. Find how you saved the upstream remote repo (valkey-io/valkey-glide):

Reviewer: No need to repeat this

            e.

            ```
            [10:09:23] ubuntu (v1.x*)$ git remote -vv
            origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (fetch)
            origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (push)
            origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (fetch)
            origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (push)
            ```

>             f. Push the tag to the upstream remote so it would trigger the CD action:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            f. Push the tag to the upstream remote to trigger the CD action
```

>             g. git push origin-aws v1.x.x-rc0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            g. `git push origin-aws v1.x.x-rc0`
```

>             h. For each time your release fails all you need to do is create new tag in which the next rc version (e.g. v0.5.0-rc3 → v0.5.0-rc4).

Reviewer 2: I really don't understand this sentence's intentions. It's a sentence fragment. My suggestion is based on how I interpreted it.
```suggestion
            h. For each time your release fails, you need to create a new tag with the next rc version (e.g. v0.5.0-rc3 → v0.5.0-rc4).
```

Author: i also don't really understand that point that well either.

Author: @acarbonetto do you know it is referring to?

>             i. After the release candidate deployed, in node tests running automatically and when release candidate CD workflow is done successfully we can immediately release the real version. In python there’s no such support currently, so you'll first need to test the RC version you deployed on the different supported platform.You can do so by cloning the repo into each machine, go to [examples/python/requirements.txt](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide/blob/main/examples/python/requirements.txt).

Reviewer: Don't mess up how to test an RC for node and for python clients.
Add a new titles for each client and describe all there

            j. and change the version to the version you just released.

>             ![Valkey version](images-release-md/valkey-version.png)

Reviewer: Why this comes as a screenshot? Paste as a code block

            k. From the root directory,
                run `cd examples/python`
            l. Then,
                run `pip install -r requirements.txt`
            m. Then,
                run `pip list` and validate that the right version has been installed.
            n. run `python3 ../../utils/cluster_manager.py -r 1 -n 3 --cluster-mode`
                and
                `python3 ../../utils/cluster_manager.py -r 1 -n 1`

            o. Edit the file [standalone_example.py](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide/blob/main/examples/python/standalone_example.py) or [cluster_example.py](https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide/blob/main/examples/python/standalone_example.py) to have the right port in the different functions and run python3.

>             p. Once the CD workflow and all test have passed, you can release a real version such as `git tag v1.3.0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            p. Once the CD workflow and all test have passed, you can release a final version such as `git tag v1.3.0`.
```

>             q. Find how you saved the upstream remote repo (valkey-io/valkey-glide):

Reviewer: again?

            r.
            ```
            [10:09:23] ubuntu (v1.x*)$ git remote -vv
            origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (fetch)
            origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (push)
            origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (fetch)
            origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (push)
            ```
            s. Push the tag to the upstream remote so it will trigger the CD action:

            t. git push origin-aws v1.x.x

2. Update the release notes in github

>     a. Go to: https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide/releases

Reviewer: Maintainer rights are required

    b. Click on "Draft a new release"

    c. Add the release tag

>     d. Copy + paste the release notes from the CHANGELOG.md file

Reviewer: It could be populated automatically

## How to use GLIDE's CD workflows

For deployment guide, see the above section **`GLIDE - How to release a new version`**.

### **Secrets**

> Please **contact a Valkey-GLIDE maintainer** to access the secrets for this repository.

Reviewer: Even a maintainer should not know the secrets. Those are secrets.

### **How to trigger the CD workflow**

The CD workflow can be triggered in several ways.

1. **By pushing a Version Tag**: Trigger the CD workflow by pushing a version tag in the format "v*.*." or "v.*.*-rc".
For example, v1.0.0-rc1. When triggered by a push event with a version tag, all package manager CD workflows (e.g., pypi-cd.yml, npm-cd.yml, java-cd.yml) will be initiated.
The version will be extracted from the tag.

    a.
    ```

>     [13:39:23] ubuntu $ git remote -vv

Reviewer: again?

    origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (fetch)
    origin  https://github.com/your-repo/valkey-glide (push)
    origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (fetch)
    origin-aws      https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-glide (push)
    ```

2. **By Workflow Dispatch:** Manually trigger the CD workflow using the "workflow dispatch" option.
This is done on a specific CD workflow by passing the required version as an input parameter in the format "*.*.*" or "*.*.*-rc*".
This method will not trigger deployments for other package managers and will not create a tag in the repository.

    a. <br>

>     ![pypi CD](images-release-md/pypi-CD.png)

Reviewer: Move pictures to another directory
```suggestion
    ![pypi CD](docs/images/pypi-CD.png)
```
you can create one more sub-dir
```suggestion
    ![pypi CD](docs/images/releasing/pypi-CD.png)
```

> 

Reviewer: TLDR below

You need to decide who is your target audience. Half of the instructions could be replaced by "ask maintainer to do ...". On another hand, anyone could help with testing RC and updating release notes.

I think you need to split this file into sections: one for an arbitrary open source contributor who wants to help with the release activities and other section for maintainers.
Maintainers don't need detailed instructions on how to run a CD job or create/push a branch.

3. **Pull Requests:** Pull requests will trigger the CD workflows as "dry runs" without actually publishing to the package managers.
This ensures that changes do not break the CD logic. Note that PRs affecting the CD workflows (e.g., introducing changes in the CD paths) can only be opened from branches on the
valkey-io/valkey-glide main repo (rather than from forks) since running the CD, even without publishing, requires access to the repository's secrets.

### **Self-hosted runner**

> We use a self-hosted runner for Linux-arm64, as GitHub does not currently provide one.

Reviewer: GH provides such runners, but it is cheaper to use SH one
